Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is caused by a coronavirus family member known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). The main laboratory test to confirm the quick diagnosis of COVID-19 infection is reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) based on nasal or throat swab sampling. A small percentage of false-negative RT-PCR results have been reported. The RT-PCR test has a sensitivity of 50–72%, which could be attributed to a low viral load in test specimens or laboratory errors. In contrast, chest CT has shown 56–98% of sensitivity in diagnosing COVID-19 at initial presentation and has been suggested to be useful in correcting false negatives from RT-PCR. Chest X-rays and CT scans have been proposed to predict COVID-19 disease severity by displaying the score of lung involvement and thus providing information about the diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19 infection. As a result, the current study provides a comprehensive overview of the utility of the severity score index using X-rays and CT scans in diagnosing patients with COVID-19 when compared to RT-PCR.

The role of the severity scores of CXRs and CT scans (CXR-SS and CCT-SS) in the diagnosis of COVID-19:

COVID-19 has infected around 1.8 million people and caused the deaths of approximately 114,698 worldwide. Most countries lack sufficient diagnostic tools due to the rising number of reported cases every day. Therefore, it is critical to accurately stratify patients with COVID-19 according to the severity of their diseases in order to allocate resources effectively (73). Specifically, the value of peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) is one of the first measures checked for each patient on admission; it often reflects the degree of lung function impairment. The requirement to transfer a patient with COVID-19 to an ICU is mostly determined by their SpO2, in addition to concurrent comorbidities (74). This, however, has been suggested to be achieved by imaging. CXR has been proposed to predict COVID-19 disease severity by showing the score of lung involvement and therefore providing an idea about the prognosis of COVID-19 infection. A recent previous study (75) has introduced the CXR scoring system for quantifying the severity and progression of lung abnormalities in COVID-19 pneumonia. Another previous study (76) assessed the extent of COVID-19 pulmonary abnormalities on CXR in large data set (926 consecutive patients) using a 0–3 semiquantitative severity score in 1-point increment on 6 lung zones (range 0–18), correlated it with clinical data, and tested its interobserver agreement. This study showed that interobserver agreement was found to be moderate to almost perfect, and associations with clinical parameters were significant (negative correlation with blood oxygen saturation but positive correlation with white cell count, lactate dehydrogenase, and C-reactive protein), suggesting that CXR might be further integrated into the classification of patients with COVID-19. This CXR scoring system, which is known as the Brixia score, was introduced in late March 2020 due to the high number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and a high mortality rate of 9.3% in Italy. The scoring system is a very useful tool for ranking the stratification of COVID-19 infection, suggesting confirmation of the use of the CXR scoring system in many countries (54). The CXR scoring system also provides information on pulmonary involvement based on an 18-point severity scale according to the extent and characteristics of lung abnormalities. Even though CXR is considered not sensitive for the detection of pulmonary involvement in the early stage of the disease, a previous study (54) suggested that CXR can be a useful diagnostic tool for detecting the rapid progression of lung abnormalities in infected patients with COVID-19, particularly in intensive care units (ICUs). The CXR scoring system is a simple five-point grading tool that was proposed in 2015 and was designed for non-radiologist clinicians. The goal of this scoring system was to facilitate the clinical grading of CXR reports into five different severity categories in hospitalized patients with acute respiratory infections

CCT severity score index:

The severity of COVID-19 can be ascertained from previous imaging findings, which supports the clinician’s clinical judgment and ensures effective and timely management (70). The severity of COVID-19 can also affect the prognosis of the disease in critically ill patients, allowing appropriate selection of early involvement in intensive care. The CCT has also been suggested to predict COVID-19 disease severity by showing the score of lung involvement. Emanuel et al. (72) proposed the use of the CCT severity score to categorize the severity of CT findings in the chest. The score is based on a technique developed in 2005 to monitor the spread of the SARS virus. For this scale, lung opacification serves as a proxy for the degree to which the lungs are affected. Each lung has 18 segments, and these segments are further subdivided into 20 regions using the CCT severity score. For example, the anteromedial basal segment of the left lower lobe is further divided into basal and anterior segmental regions, and the posterior apical segment of the left upper lobe is further subdivided into posterior and apical segmental regions. Parenchymal opacification scores could range from 0 (no engagement) to 2 (extreme involvement), with 0 indicating no involvement and 2 indicating 100% involvement in each location. The final score, from 0 to 40, is calculated by adding up the points for each of the 20 different areas of the lungs. Several previous studies (77, 78) have explained how pulmonary involvement in the CCT images was assessed using two methods, visual and software using deep learning algorithms for quantitative assessments. Currently, CCT is considered the most effective method for lung abnormality detection in the early stage of the disease and quantitative assessment of the severity of COVID-19 pneumonia (70, 79). CT severity score or index is defined as a scoring system used to assess lung involvement and changes caused by COVID-19 pulmonary infection (12). The scoring system is based on an approximate estimation of pulmonary involved areas. The right lung has three lobes, while the left lung has two lobes. Thus, each of the five lung lobes has been given a score from 1 to 5 based on a visual scoring (12), where number 1 represents less than 5% lobar involvement, number 2 represents 5–25% lobar involvement, number 3 represents 26–50% lobar involvement, number 4 represents 51–75% lobar involvement, and finally, number 5 represents more than 75% lobar involvement. All individual lobar scores are summed together to give a final score with a total score of 25 (69). According to a previous study (64), a score of 7 or less (out of 25) is mild severity, while from 8 to 17 is moderate, and above 18 is considered severe. There is evidence showing that a higher CT severity score was significantly correlated with male gender, older age groups, and a likely positive PCR test (12). A recent prospective study (80) has also found that the severity of COVID-19 was associated with higher age, male sex, and higher BMI. The CCT severity score index of lung involvement in the acute phase was also associated with restriction and a reduction in diffusion capacity in follow-up. In contrast, a recent study has found no differences in the severity score between sexes in the Mexican-Mestizo population grouped by age (81). Altogether, these previous studies support the correlation between the imaging (CXR and CT) severity score index and demographics.

Modern computational methods, such as deep learning or machine learning, are used for disease identification and play a crucial role in the screening of emergency cases. Using machine learning (or artificial intelligence (AI)-driven tool) has been suggested to have a number of advantages in the diagnosis of COVID-19 infection (82–86). It can assess several cases at the same time, be rapid, and have greater availability, making it highly useful in hospitals with no or limited testing kits and resources (87). Furthermore, since CXR is so important in today’s healthcare system, radiology imaging systems are available in every hospital, making radiography-based approaches more convenient and accessible. Nowadays, deep learning techniques are being used by researchers to recognize certain traits in CXR and CT images of patients with COVID-19. A previous study (87) developed a deep learning model (CoroNet model) to assist radiologists and doctors to detect patients with COVID-19 using CXRs. This study showed that after training and testing on the prepared dataset, the CoroNet deep learning model achieved an overall accuracy of 89.6%, with a 93% precision rate and a 98.2% recall rate for COVID-19 cases for four cases: COVID vs. pneumonia bacterial vs. pneumonia viral vs. normal. This approach achieved a 95% accuracy in classifying data into three classes (COVID, pneumonia, and normal), suggesting that initial findings from this study show promise. Another recent previous study (88) classified COVID-19 as normal, pneumonia-bacterial, and pneumonia-viral with 83.5% accuracy. In addition, a previous study (89) has reported a deep learning architecture for COVID-19 detection from CXR images and built a dataset of 5,000 COVID-19 CXRs with a radiologist’s help (using images from two datasets). This study found that most machine learning models achieved a specificity rate of around 90% and a sensitivity rate of around 98% on the COVID-X-ray-5000 dataset. Furthermore, a recent systematic review discussed AI-guided methods for the detection and screening of COVID-19 infections using cough sounds (86, 90). This previous review focused on AI-guided tools that use machine learning algorithms to evaluate cough sounds for screening for COVID-19. In CT scans, a previous study (91) designed a convolutional neural network (CNN)-tailored deep neural network (DNN) that can train or test CT scans. The study achieved 96.2% accuracy (AUC = 0.9808, false negative rate = 0.0208). Other than COVID-19, deep learning has been implicated in several chest diseases. For example, a previous review study (92) has discussed machine learning techniques for analyzing CXR images for screening cardiopulmonary abnormalities, particularly tuberculosis (TB). In addition, Shiraishi et al. (92) have developed a digital image database of 247 chest radiographs with and without a lung nodule in general. They investigated the characteristics of image databases to see if they could be used in various digital image research projects. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used to assess radiologists’ recognition of single lung nodules in the database. The ROC analysis demonstrated that the database contains a wide variety of nodules, with the area under the curve (Az) values ranging from 0.574 to 0.991 across the five categories of instances. Altogether, these studies support the role of AI including machine learning and deep learning, in the diagnosis of pulmonary diseases including, COVID-19.